A major barrier to assessing the effects of global change on complex ecosystems is the scarcity of food web observations spanning the spatial and temporal scales needed to reveal significant change. This study hopes to rectify this by presenting 4728 empirical food webs constructed every 50 km across the North Sea annually from 1992-2016. We also present a dynamic, reproducible framework for devising food webs at different spatial or temporal scales by integrating nearly four decades of standardised groundfish survey data with one of the world’s most comprehensive stomach content databases. This time series of spatially resolved food webs should help enrich analyses of environmental change on food web structure and aid reliable benchmarking of ecosystem-based management in one of the world’s most commercially important and anthropogenically influenced continental shelves. 

The data required to reconstruct the food webs at the same or different spatial and temporal scales can be found in the University of Essex Data Repository (DOI)

Methodology

Description of datasets used to construct the food webs

Fish survey 

This dataset offers a standardised record of groundfish catches across the Northeast Atlantic spanning nearly four decades (Lynam and Riberio, 2022), drawing on extensive scientific trawl survey data from the ICES database of trawl surveys (DATRAS). A subset of -3.5 to 8.5 degrees longitude and 51.24 to 61.75 degrees latitude from 1992-2016 was used in this study due to the more limited availability of standardised data on commercial fishing as well as the extensive time-series available within this region. Here, the subsetted data are referred to as the fish survey database, which holds 3,334,387 abundance observations of 371 taxa sampled from 24,843 hauls from 1992-2016. The most common species in the fish survey are whiting (Merlangius merlangus), common dab (Limanda limanda), and haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus). The dataset reports taxa abundance at regular body size intervals and has been supplemented with information on biomass via routine sampling of length-mass relationships. This dataset was used to establish the fish predator taxa present in the environment for any given food web. Unfortunately, marine mammals and seabird data was not included due to limited availability at similar spatial and temporal scales.

Stomach contents 

To establish the trophic interactions between consumers and resources, we used a data collation that includes DAPTSOM (an Integrated Database and Portal for Fish Stomach Records; Pinnegar, 2019) and ICES Year of the Stomach (Daan 1981; ICES, 1997). This database is one of the most comprehensive archives of dietary data globally. Stomach samples were collected as early as 1837 and continued until 2016. The dataset used here brings together over 415,658 records of trophic interactions within 156,452 individual stomachs sampled from 6924 research hauls across the northeast Atlantic. The most common stomach samples are from Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua), whiting (Merlangius merlangus) and haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus). More information on this stomach contents data is detailed by Thompson et al. (2020). From here on, this dataset is referred to as the stomach contents database. 

Steps were taken to clean and standardise the database. Firstly, predator and prey taxa were renamed if there were obvious discrepancies, for example “Octopus” was renamed to “Octopodidae” to match the Latin nomenclature used for the vast majority of observations. Unrefined data whereby the taxonomic resolution was not resolved to the family level or lower, including prey taxa labelled as “Decapoda”, “Chordata”, “Mollusca”, and “Arthropoda” were removed from the entire stomach contents database (13.37 % of original dataset was deleted). Feeding guilds group predators based on similar feeding traits (size and abundance of prey in a diet) and were added to all fish predators in the stomach contents data to account for ontogenetic shifts in a species diet (Thompson et al 2025). These feeding guilds consisted of planktivore (PL), benthivore (BE), bentho-piscivore (BP), and piscivore (PI). If the feeding guild could not be established directly, it was inferred by a predator of the same genus that was the most similar in size. However, predators that had no feeding guild information and less than ten observations across the entire stomach contents were removed from all datasets (0.05 % of original dataset was deleted), as there was not enough information to directly infer their diets.

Food web construction

The North Sea study area (−3.5° to 8.5° longitude and 51.25° to 61.75° latitude) was divided into 50 × 50 km grid cells. The central longitude and latitude of each cell were used as focal points for constructing food webs. Fish species included in each food web were identified from all survey hauls conducted within a 100 km radius of the focal coordinate for a given year (1992–2016). This approach produced fuzzy boundaries between food webs, as overlapping 100 km radii introduced spatial continuity and dynamics absent in traditional hard-boundary delineations. To account for differences in sampling effort across the spatial region, a minimum of five and a maximum of ten hauls were taken per 100 km radius. If there were more than ten hauls present, the closest ten to the focal grid coordinate were selected. The fish species present were assigned a feeding guild following Thompson et al. (2025). The mean biomass (kg km-2), abundance (individuals km-2), and mean weight (g) within the 100 km radius were also recorded for each species. The next step involved subsetting the stomach contents database by year and the same 100 km radius around each focal grid coordinate to identify all possible prey taxa present in that particular space and time. This together with the subsetted fish survey data determined the possible nodes within each food web and is referred to as the species master list. 

Predator–prey interactions were first determined by subsetting the local stomach contents data according to each predator species identified in the fish survey. To ensure sufficient stomach content data were available to accurately characterize predator diets, when establishing trophic interactions, data from all years were combined for each local area. Consequentially when food webs are constructed, they rely on spatial variation of trophic interactions. However, the species composition represented spatial and temporal changes as only interactions between taxa known to be present according to the species masters list were included i.e. any diets are only inclusive of taxa observed within the local area within a given year. This approach was necessary because the temporal coverage of stomach content observations was too patchy to reliably assess changes in trophic interactions over time. This approach could be easily modified in our code if a different temporal resolution of trophic interactions is desired. Most predators in the stomach contents database are resolved to species level, making it straightforward to connect species in the food web based on this information. However, taxa resolved to genus level were renamed to taxa resolved to the species level from the same genus and within that grid coordinate in order to consolidate the nodes and trophic links within the food web. If no other taxa of the same species were present, then the taxa remained resolved to the genus level. 

To evaluate whether sufficient data were available to represent each predator’s diet, species accumulation (yield–effort) curves were constructed using the ‘specaccum’ function from the vegan R package (Oksanen et al., 2007). The expected total prey diversity for each predator was then estimated by fitting six model distributions (‘lomolino’, ‘arrhenius’, ‘gleason’, ‘gitay’, ‘asymp’, and ‘logis’) using the ‘fitspecaccum’ function, with the best-fitting model selected based on the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value. A predator’s diet was considered to be at a satisfactory level of completion when the observed number of prey taxa represented at least 75 % of the total prey richness predicted by the selected model. If the predator species was not represented in the local stomach contents or its diet completion was below 75 %, then local interactions from the predator species within the same genus that were most similar in size were included in the diet of that predator. This process was repeated iteratively until all predator diets were sufficiently complete: first by adding local data from all species of the same genus that were not more than double in size; then from local data from species in the same feeding guild and most similar in size; then from local data and all species within the same feeding guild that were not more than double the size; finally from across the global stomach contents database by adding interactions observed for that predator species from the entire range of space and time. Statistics on how many diets were completed at each step are include in Table 1. On average across all food webs, 89 % of fish predator species had a diet completion over 75 %. 

The body mass and abundance of the fish predators were taken directly from the local fish survey. The abundance of the non-fish prey was taken from the prey count indicated by the trophic interactions, and the biomass of the prey was calculated using this abundance multiplied by the individual weight recorded from the stomach contents. These measurements have some limitations such as the impact of digestion on estimates of prey weight; however, they are the best estimate in the absence of biological survey data for prey taxa at the same spatiotemporal scale as the fish. 

After establishing trophic interactions of the fish predator species, we attempted to determine trophic interactions between their prey. First, if the prey taxa were themselves fish, the previous steps of identifying interactions from the stomach contents database at the species, genus, and feeding guild level were completed for these taxa and their trophic adjacency matrices were constructed.  Prey taxa that were not fish were assigned to one of the following feeding groups: herbivorous zooplankton, omnivorous zooplankton, decapods, hydrozoans, tunicates, barnacles, bivalves, bryozoans, omnivorous echinoderms, herbivorous echinoderms, herbivorous gastropods, omnivorous gastropods, cephalopods, omnivorous cnidarians, herbivorous cnidarians, and sponges and their diets were inferred based on a published North Sea food web model by Mackinson and Daskalov (2007). For example, if a prey taxon was classified as omnivorous zooplankton taxon, it was assumed to feed on herbivorous zooplankton taxa based on the North Sea model (Mackinson and Daskalov, 2007). Accordingly, a feeding interaction was established between the omnivorous zooplankton taxa and all herbivorous zooplankton known to occur within the spatial scale of the food web. If the prey taxon was known to consume small teleosts (Mackinson and Daskalov, 2007), feeding interactions were created to all fish species that were under 10 cm in length at maturity. Some prey taxa consumed basal resources including phytoplankton, CPOM, FPOM, microalgae, macroalgae fungi, and bacteria (Mackinson and Daskalov, 2007), which are ubiquitous throughout the North Sea and thus were added to every food web.

All trophic interactions of the fish predators, fish prey and non-fish prey taxa were combined to complete the food webs. Additional final checks included the removal of any isolated nodes and cannibalistic trophic links. A final rule whereby no consumer could be smaller than their prey was implemented. This was due to the highly size-structured nature of aquatic ecosystems (Woodward et al. 2005, Petchey et al. 2008), supported by a minimum predator-prey body mass ratio of 1.002 across the entire stomach contents database.  A final attribute table was developed including taxon names (nodes), feeding group, abundance (N), and biomass (M) as well as the latitude, longitude, and year of the food web in question. The final feeding groups included fish, basal, and all the prey groups listed in Table 2. This created a total of 4865 well-sampled empirical food webs across the North Sea from 1992 – 2016 (Figure 1). The largest food web included 320 nodes and 20,724 trophic links, and the smallest food web included 50 nodes and 543 trophic links.
A final step was to calculate the weight of the trophic interactions. This was done using the fluxing function in the fluxweb package in R (Gauzens et al., 2019). The predictions produced by fluxweb are based on body mass scaling of trophic interactions (Petchey et al., 2008, Vucic‐Pestic et al., 2010). The model assumes a steady state system where losses by predation or physiological processes equal gains from consumption (Gauzens et al., 2019).

where Wij defines the proportion of Fj that is obtained from species i, Fi is the sum of all ingoing energy flux from species i, e defines a species feeding efficiency and Xi is the energetic loss from species i. The weight of each trophic link was added to the list of trophic interactions. Note that energy flux could not be calculated for 137 food webs due to the model being unable to balance the energy flux with the given food web structure, thus the final number of food webs in our database is 4728.
